Implement `:unit` as Proposed RECOMMENDED in the registry (#922)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/registry.md

such as the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:unit` _annotation_,
it can include option values.
These are included in the resolved option values of the _expression_,
with _options_ on the _expression_ taking priority over any option values of the _operand_.

> For example, the _placeholder_ in this _message_:
> ```
> .input {$n :unit unit=furlong minimumFractionDigits=2}
> {{{$n :unit minimumIntegerDigits=1}}}
> ```
> would have the resolved options:
> `{ unit: 'furlong', minimumFractionDigits: '2', minimumIntegerDigits: '1' }`.

Not all per-units are compatible with the primary unit.
Implementations will produce a _Bad Option_ error for units 
or combinations of units and per-units that are not supported.

#### Selection

The _function_ `:unit` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

#### Composition

When an _operand_ or an _option_ value uses a _variable_ annotated,
directly or indirectly, by a `:unit` _annotation_,
its _resolved value_ contains an implementation-defined unit value
of the _operand_ of the annotated _expression_,
together with the resolved options' values.

> [!NOTE]

> > Some implementations support conversation between compatible units.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Some implementations support conversion between compatible units.
```

> For example, consider the value:
> ```
> {
>    "value": 123.5,
>    "unit": "meter"
> }
> ```
> The following _message_ might convert the formatted result to U.S. customary units:
> ```

> > You have {$v :unit unit=foot} to go.

Reviewer: It seems like a pretty big footgun to me for some implementations to format this as "123.5 feet" while others format it as "405.2 feet".

Author: Yes, but not really what we're saying. It either formats as `405.2 feet` or emits _Bad Option_.

Author: I fixed up this text a bunch, made it normative, and moved it to the options section. Have a look.

> ```

> > Care has to be excersized with this type of operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Care has to be exercised with this type of operation.
```

of the _operand_ of the annotated _expression_,
together with the resolved options' values.

### `:unit` function

The function `:unit` is a selector and formatter for unitized values,
that is, numeric values associated with a unit of measurement.
This is a specialized form of numeric selection and formatting.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Implementation of this function is **_OPTIONAL_**.
> Any implementation of this function is strongly encouraged to follow this specification.

#### Operands

The _operand_ of the `:unit` function can be one of any number of
implementation-defined types,

> each of which contains a numerical `value` plus a `unit` and optionally a `perUnit`.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence. A perunit is a unit. 'unit' includes compounds, so:

kilowatt-hour-per-tonne is a unit, as is

- kilowatt-per-tonne
- per-tonne
- per-kilowatt-hour
- meter-watt-kilogram-per-square-second.

Author: I'm mirroring what `MeasureFormat` currently does, which allows for a `perUnit` (so that one can modify a simple unit with a per-unit, like turning "furlongs" into "furlongs per fortnight". I can take this out and we can rely on the per-unit units already defined. It would make things _much_ simpler.

Author: For reference: https://unicode-org.github.io/icu-docs/apidoc/released/icu4j/com/ibm/icu/text/MeasureFormat.html#formatMeasurePerUnit-com.ibm.icu.util.Measure-com.ibm.icu.util.MeasureUnit-java.lang.StringBuilder-java.text.FieldPosition-

Reviewer 2: I checked and that is a convenience function. So instead of saying unit='per-tonne', you can say perUnit='tonne'. So if you also want to include it as a 'convenience option' that's fine. I would just define it using that equivalence.

Author: No, we're at the minimum requirements level here. I'll let @mihnita define that for ICU (if he wants to expose it) and will remove all the per-unit foolishness.

Reviewer 2: sounds good!

     (no default)
- `perUnit`
  - valid [Unit Identifier](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-general.html#unit-identifiers)
    (no default)
- `unitDisplay`
  - `short` (default)
  - `narrow`
  - `long`
- `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `signDisplay`
   -  `auto` (default)
   -  `always`
   -  `exceptZero`
   -  `negative`
   -  `never`
- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `always`
  - `never`
  - `min2`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options), default: `1`)
- `minimumFractionDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumFractionDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `minimumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))

> 

Reviewer 2: This also needs the **usage** setting. See https://unicode-org.github.io/icu-docs/apidoc/released/icu4j/com/ibm/icu/number/NumberFormatterSettings.html

That is what is used to signal that the unit **should be** converted to the local units if possible. Without it, the unit should **not** be converted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `usage`
```

Author: Where are the valid values defined? Should I define a grammar for these (appears to be hyphen separated ASCII tokens??)?

I haven't worked with units in NumberFormatter. My experience is limited to MeasureFormat. I have a sense that I should push this to post-46.1 and we start with design (preferably from someone on the implementation side) rather than forcing it here.

Reviewer 2: The grammar is defined in https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-general.html#unit-identifiers, with the EBNF at https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-general.html#syntax

Author: Those are unit identifiers. Where is the definition for **_usage_** identifiers?

Reviewer 2: Sorry, the valid usage identifiers are `category` attribute values of the element `unitPreferences`, which are in the file [`supplemental/units.xml`](https://github.com/unicode-org/cldr/blob/main/common/supplemental/units.xml).

For example, `blood-glucose` because it is in:
```
<unitPreferences category="concentration" usage="blood-glucose">
  <unitPreference regions="AG AI AO AU BA BG BH BM BN BW BY CA CH CM CN CZ DK DM EE FI FJ GB GD HK HR HU IE IM IS KE KN KW KZ LC LI LT LU LV ME MG MK MO MS MT MU MY MZ NA NL NO NZ OM PG RS RU SE SG SI SK TC TO UA UG VC VG VN VU ZA">millimole-per-liter</unitPreference>
  <unitPreference regions="001">milligram-ofglucose-per-deciliter</unitPreference>
</unitPreferences>
```

Note: there is a ticket for creating a regular validity/ data file for the usage values. It would make it cleaner to reference that, so I'll look at accelerating that into v46.1 so that MF2.0 in 46.1 can use a more direct reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `usage`
    - Well-formed and valid usage identifiers are defined in [Unicode Preferences](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-info.html#unit-preferences).
```

I have a PR to make the target of the link clearer, in https://github.com/unicode-org/cldr/pull/4179. I don't foresee any problem merging that into 46.1.

If the _operand_ of the _expression_ is an implementation-defined type,
such as the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:unit` _annotation_,
it can include option values.
These are included in the resolved option values of the _expression_,
with _options_ on the _expression_ taking priority over any option values of the _operand_.

> For example, the _placeholder_ in this _message_:
> ```
> .input {$n :unit unit=furlong minimumFractionDigits=2}
> {{{$n :unit minimumIntegerDigits=1}}}
> ```
> would have the resolved options:
> `{ unit: 'furlong', minimumFractionDigits: '2', minimumIntegerDigits: '1' }`.

Some implementations support conversion between compatible units.

> Attempting to convert units (by specifying the `unit` option)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Attempting to convert units (by specifying the `usage` option)
```

> For example, the _placeholder_ in this _message_:
> ```
> .input {$n :unit unit=furlong minimumFractionDigits=2}
> {{{$n :unit minimumIntegerDigits=1}}}
> ```
> would have the resolved options:
> `{ unit: 'furlong', minimumFractionDigits: '2', minimumIntegerDigits: '1' }`.

#### Resolved Value

The _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:unit` _function_
consist of an implementation-defined unit value
of the _operand_ of the annotated _expression_,
together with the resolved _options_ and their resolved values.

#### Selection

The _function_ `:unit` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

#### Unit Conversion

Implementations MAY support conversion to the locale's preferred units via the `usage` _option_.
Implementing this _option_ is optional.
Not all `usage` values are compatible with a given unit.
Implementations SHOULD emit an _Unsupported Operation_ error if the requestion conversion is not supported.

> For example, trying to convert a `length` unit such as meters
> to a `volume` unit (such as "gallons") could produce an _Unsupported Operation_ error.

> 

Author: Actually, this is the one I would want an error for (see my comment elsewhere). The addition of "has no effect" is good, although it's really a MUST. I'll try again here.

> 

Reviewer 2: I'm OK with MUST. 

As to the error, I'm ok with MAY issue an _Unsupported Operation_; not sure it should be required. 

Side note that the usage also may have no effect if the size of the unit and the locale indicate that.

The _function_ `:currency` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

### The `:unit` function

The _function_ `:unit` is **Proposed** for inclusion in the next release of this specification but has not yet been finalized.
The _function_ `:unit` is proposed to be a **RECOMMENDED** selector and formatter for unitized values,
that is, for numeric values associated with a unit of measurement.
This is a specialized form of numeric selection and formatting.

#### Operands

The _operand_ of the `:unit` function can be one of any number of
implementation-defined types,
each of which contains a numerical `value` plus a `unit`
or it can be a [Number Operand](#number-operands), as long as the _option_
`unit` is provided.

> The _option_ `unit` MAY be used to override the units of an implementation-defined type,
> provided the units are compatible and the implementation supports conversion.

Reviewer 2: Hmmm. I missed this.

I have never thought of 'unit=x' as involving or requiring conversion, but rather simply using the numeric value of the operand with the specified unit x. I think that you are right; this should take a bit of rewording. Perhaps:

```suggestion
The _option_ `unit` MAY be used to override the unit value of an implementation-defined type,
if the implementation supports unit conversion. 
However, if the units cannot be converted, then the unit value is not overridden and a Bad Option error must be emitted.
```

**Side issue**

Frankly, currency is even worse. Suppose we have input of a implementation-defined parameter $n = {value=300, currency=EUR} and we format or select {$n :currency currency=JPY}. That is really nasty, displaying 300¥. However, there is no stable conversion possible.

So for :currency, we should make it really clear that if there is an implementation-defined operand that contains a currency value, the currency option is invalid, no matter its value.

> provided the units are compatible and the implementation supports conversion.

Author: Currency explicitly says that this is an error.

The unit example is a leftover from early on. I will make it use `usage`. We should do the same thing with the `unit` option that we do with the `currency` option: you can use it to create a unit value with a number operand. Otherwise it is an error.

> provided the units are compatible and the implementation supports conversion.

Reviewer 2: Sounds great.

   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `signDisplay`
   -  `auto` (default)
   -  `always`
   -  `exceptZero`
   -  `negative`
   -  `never`
- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `always`
  - `never`
  - `min2`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options), default: `1`)
- `minimumFractionDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumFractionDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `minimumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `roundingPriority`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `morePrecision`
  - `lessPrecision`
- `roundingIncrement`
  - 1 (default), 2, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, 100, 200, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 2500, and 5000
- `roundingMode`
  - `ceil`
  - `floor`
  - `expand`
  - `trunc`
  - `halfCeil`
  - `halfFloor`
  - `halfExpand` (default)
  - `halfTrunc`
  - `halfEven`

> If the _operand_ of the _expression_ is an implementation-defined type,
> such as the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:unit` _annotation_,
> it can include _option_ values.

Author: I'm not sure I understand. I don't think this needs to indicate that some types are not supported as operands.

This text is not about the _operand_. It's about the handling of _option_ values within a _resolved value_. It is nearly boilerplate, since most of our functions have a variation of this sentence. In practice, it might be better to say something like the following, which doesn't care what the operand is or is not:

```suggestion
The _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:unit` _annotation_
includes the result of _option resolution_.
```

Such a boilerplate would be altered if some of the options were required to be filtered by the function. `unit` is candidate for this in `:unit` (since the `unit` presumably is now part of the resolved operand).

These are included in the resolved _option_ values of the _expression_,
with _options_ on the _expression_ taking priority over any _option_ values of the _operand_.

> For example, the _placeholder_ in this _message_:
> ```
> .input {$n :unit unit=furlong minimumFractionDigits=2}
> {{{$n :unit minimumIntegerDigits=1}}}
> ```
> would have the resolved options:
> `{ unit: 'furlong', minimumFractionDigits: '2', minimumIntegerDigits: '1' }`.

#### Resolved Value

The _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:unit` _function_
consist of an implementation-defined unit value
of the _operand_ of the annotated _expression_,
together with the resolved _options_ and their resolved values.

#### Selection

> The _function_ `:unit` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

Reviewer 2: Take 2 cases:

1. If I format {{unit=kilogram, operand=30}, usage=person, maximumFractionDigits=0} with {u:locale=|en-US|} I'll get "66 pounds".
2. If I format {{unit=pound, operand=66.1387}, maximumFractionDigits=0} I'll also get "66 pounds".

So what is happening in **both cases** is that the numeric value for selection is equivalent to what the formatted value has. And that is what needs to be selected on, namely 66.

The wording we have for that in [selection as described in](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/registry.md#number-selection)

> where resolvedSelector is the _resolved value_ of a _selector_

So in both cases, the _resolved value_ has to be 66.

There are of course other cases: {{operand=66.1387}, maximumSignificantDigits=1} will format as "70" (In English), and "٧٠" in Arabic, and must match a selection key of 70.

So in this case, the resolved value has to be 70.

I think we haven't yet nailed 'resolved value', because the resolved value for selection and formatting ends up needing to be different than the resolved value for functional composition. But that we cannot resolve at this point in the release.

> The _function_ `:unit` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

Reviewer 3: I understand that what you describe is likely the intent here, but the _resolved value_ description talks of "an implementation-defined unit value of the _operand_ of the annotated _expression_", with no reference to any conversion possibly being made to it, and so it's reasonable to assume that e.g. your case 1 example would end up with the numerical value `30` being the value that selection is done on, and as the selection is the same as used for other numerical values, it doesn't know about needing to multiply the number by any such factor.

Note how in `:math`, the numeric value held in _resolved value_ is explicitly modified by the `add` and `subtract` option values. We need something like that here.

> The _function_ `:unit` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

Author: If we permitted `unit` to convert, I agree that the resolved value should be modified. But I think we should do like `:currency` and only allow `unit` to compose with a numeric operand.

> The _function_ `:unit` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

Reviewer 2: That works for me, and is safe and far simpler.

It would still be possible for a future version to allow that, but I think one would have to make a good case for doing so.

> #### Unit Conversion

Reviewer 3: According to the text above, unit conversion is also possible via the `unit` option. That should be mentioned here beyond its errant use in the example below, possibly along with some description of what happens if you define both `unit` and `usage`.

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

The _function_ `:currency` performs selection as described in [Number Selection](#number-selection) below.

### The `:unit` function

The _function_ `:unit` is a selector and formatter for unitized values,
that is, numeric values associated with a unit of measurement.
This is a specialized form of numeric selection and formatting.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Implementation of this function is **_OPTIONAL_**.

Author: We moved to REQUIRED/RECOMMENDED this past week. I implemented the change in the most recent push.

> For runtime environments that do not provide a ready-made data structure,
> class, or type for unit values, the implementation ought to provide
> a data structure, convenience function, or documentation on how to encode
> the value and unit for formatting.
> For example, such an implementation might define a "unit operand"
> to include a key-value structure with specific keys to be the
> local unit operand, which might look like the following:
> ```
> {
>    "value": 123.45,
>    "unit": "kilometer-per-hour"
> }
> ```

#### Options

Some _options_ do not have default values defined in this specification.
The defaults for these _options_ are implementation-dependent.
In general, the default values for such _options_ depend on the locale, 
the unit,
the value of other _options_, or all of these.

> [!NOTE]
> The option `select` does not accept the value `ordinal` because selecting
> unit values using ordinal rules makes no sense.

The following options and their values are required to be available on the function `:unit`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `exact`
- `unit`
   - valid [Unit Identifier](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-general.html#unit-identifiers)

>      (no default)

Reviewer 3: I continue to be uncomfortable with an effective requirement to emit Unsupported Operation errors for this one option instead of Bad Option, for values that are not supported by the implementation. That feels like a wart.

Reviewer 2: The definitions of [your engagement is non-provisioned](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/errors.md#bad-option) and https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/errors.md#bad-option overlap. Thus if something is in the intersection one could go either way. This needs to be cleaned up in the future, but I added a suggestion to change to Bad Option to resolve this.

Author: I addressed this by making _Unsupported Operation_ SHOULD for conversions that the implementation doesn't not handle, which might include irrational ones ("milliliters => furlongs"). I removed all other mention of Unsupported or Bad Option to allow the default stuff for functions to cover it.

- `usage` \[OPTIONAL\]

>     - Well-formed and valid usage identifiers are defined in [Unicode Preferences](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-info.html#unit-preferences).

Reviewer 2: I made this exactly parallel to timezone.
```suggestion
    (see [LDML](https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-info.html#unit-preferences)
    for information on identifiers)
```

>     - (no default)

Reviewer 2: If you'd be happier with the same locution used around timezone identifiers, that sounds good to me.

>     - (no default)

Reviewer 2: I made that suggestion.

- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - ([digit size option](#digit-size-options))
- `roundingPriority`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `morePrecision`
  - `lessPrecision`
- `roundingIncrement`
  - 1 (default), 2, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50, 100, 200, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 2500, and 5000
- `roundingMode`
  - `ceil`
  - `floor`
  - `expand`
  - `trunc`
  - `halfCeil`
  - `halfFloor`
  - `halfExpand` (default)
  - `halfTrunc`
  - `halfEven`

If the _operand_ of the _expression_ is an implementation-defined type,
such as the _resolved value_ of an _expression_ with a `:unit` _annotation_,
it can include _option_ values.
These are included in the resolved _option_ values of the _expression_,
with _options_ on the _expression_ taking priority over any _option_ values of the _operand_.

> For example, the _placeholder_ in this _message_:
> ```
> .input {$n :unit unit=furlong minimumFractionDigits=2}
> {{{$n :unit minimumIntegerDigits=1}}}
> ```
> would have the resolved options:
> `{ unit: 'furlong', minimumFractionDigits: '2', minimumIntegerDigits: '1' }`.

Some implementations support conversion to the locale's preferred units via the `usage` _option_.
Implementing this _option_ is optional.

> Attempting to convert units produces an _Unsupported Operation_ error if such conversion is unsupported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Attempting to convert units produces an _Bad Option_ error if such conversion is unsupported.
```

Author: Just ⬆️ up there we said no Bad Option.

Reviewer 2: Right!

> It produces a _Bad Option_ error if the specified units are incompatible.

Reviewer 3: Does this not conflict with our prior text about accepting the function and its options? https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/f3344b5cea59e46aa8a0aa150904f53eb7690545/spec/registry.md?plain=1#L9-L13

Reviewer 2: I agree. The default if the usage is unsupported or doesn't apply is to ignore it.

Author: I agree about the _Bad Option_.

What I'm trying to do with the _Unsupported Operation_ thing, though, is give users feedback when the conversion doesn't work. Probably that's "SHOULD emit..."

> It produces a _Bad Option_ error if the specified units are incompatible.
> > For example, trying to convert a `length` unit such as meters
> > to a `volume` unit (such as "gallons") produces a _Bad Option_.

Reviewer 2: Remove this; a usage isn't a unit, so this can't happen.

```suggestion
```

Implementations MUST NOT substitute the unit without performing the associated conversion.

> For example, consider the value:
> ```
> {
>    "value": 123.5,
>    "unit": "meter"
> }
> ```
> The following _message_ might convert the formatted result to U.S. customary units:
> ```
> You have {$v :unit unit=foot maximumFractionDigits=0} to go.
> ```
> This can produce "You have 405 feet to go."

> Not all `usage` values are compatible with a given unit.
> Implementations will produce a _Bad Option_ error for units 
> or combinations of units and usages that are not supported.

Reviewer 2: No, the default is simply to leave the unit alone; it isn't a failure in that case.

```suggestion
If the `usage` values does not apply to the given unit, then it is ignored — without producing 
a _Bad Option_ error.
```
